[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> REGINA MEREDITH: Dr. Jude
Currivan's life has expanded
from the UK's coal mines
to noted Oxford scholar,
with an overarching message
that links the worlds of science
and metaphysics.
She's not using science
for science's sake,
rather for bringing a
depth of knowledge that
can be applied to
transforming and healing
our planetary consciousness,
which is a very
different kind of science book.
Your work is exhaustive.
You have done really
pristine research.
And it's very hard,
I would think,
for your colleagues
to argue with you,
as much as they would like to.
Right?
[LAUGHTER]
>> JUDE CURRIVAN: I think that
sums it up beautifully, Regina.
>> REGINA: Now we need
to tell people the story,
so they know why
this is the case.
So first of all, as a child,
coming from an environment
where people would
go into the earth
and work during the
day, what was it
that was making you kind
of shoot for the stars
in your understanding of life?
>> CURRIVAN: When I was four
years old, I was in my bedroom,
and a discarnate light came into
the room and just hung there.
And I started to hear a voice.
And that voice, as it
spoke to me, fascinated me.
And as four years old, it's
like a new toy, you know?
What's going on here?
And that really began
a lifelong journey
of curiosity and discovery.
>> REGINA: What did
the voice say to you?
Do you remember kind of what
the feeling of the message
was at the time?
Or just that the light itself
was there speaking to you,
was the inspiration,
in and of itself?
>> CURRIVAN: I can't
remember the words.
It was over 60 years ago.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
Yeah, sure.
>> CURRIVAN: But it was
a very loving voice.
I just had a sense of
familiarity with it
and lovingness of it.
And I know that in the
following months and years
and on, it became clearer.
But not just that
voice, but I started
to have what's called
clairaudient experiences
of other beings
and intelligences.
But all sorts of
stuff was happening--
I was going out of body, I was
having precognitive dreams.
Yeah, I was really
walking between worlds.
And for me, it was natural.
It wasn't something strange.
It was almost like
opening a door
and just walking into
somewhere different.
But at the same time,
I was fascinated.
I became fascinated
by the stars.
We lived in a
council house, which
is where the local council
subsidizes housing.
>> REGINA: Yes, very modest.
>> CURRIVAN: Very modest.
And yeah, we had street
lights, but still,
not enough to stop me from
being able to see the stars.
>> REGINA: Lucky you.
>> CURRIVAN: Lucky me.
And where I live now, we
have no street lights,
so we have a very clear sky.
But I was just
fascinated by the stars.
I always had a sense
of, again, familiarity.
And somehow we
were all connected.
And that took me down a
journey of exploration,
of scientific discovery.
Because I wanted to
understand the why of what
was all of this,
but also the how.
How did these experiences
that seem to be unusual--
and I shared very little
with anybody at the time.
And it wasn't that
I was scared to.
I was just having too
much fun, I think.
>> REGINA: Right?
You didn't want anyone
to ruin your fun--
>> CURRIVAN: No.
I didn't want anybody
to ruin my fun--
>> REGINA: --by questioning it.
>> CURRIVAN: --by
questioning it.
And I suppose
there was something
in me that perhaps
subconsciously I
had that fear that they might.
I know my mom wouldn't
have had that problem,
but perhaps others might.
So on that subconscious
level, I never shared widely.
But I just wanted
to understand how
what we call physical
reality somehow
emerged from this bigger,
deeper, wider reality
that I was directly
experiencing.
So I started to study
science as a language,
as a language to try
and help me understand
how the physical world somehow
emerged from this bigger world.
>> REGINA: And did you find
your answers while studying
at university?
>> CURRIVAN: No.
[LAUGHS] Almost the opposite.
I was at Oxford in the
'70s, the early '70s.
And I was almost shocked to
see that the physical realm was
the only realm that
was being considered
and that you weren't
to stray beyond that.
Even though, specializing in
quantum physics, of course,
I realized that quantum physics
doesn't work unless there's
a deeper level of reality.
Quantum physics doesn't work
unless our entire universe
is interconnected at
a very profound level.
But those aspects of it
were so peripheralized.
And so it was taught in a
very physicalized perspective.
I also specialized
in relativity,
because I was looking
at the biggest.
Again, the same things.
Relativity is showing
that, of course,
time is relative to
an observer, space
is relative to an observer, but
together they are invariant.
Otherwise, our universe couldn't
exist and evolve together--
the laws of physics couldn't.
>> REGINA: And that's
difficult for science.
>> CURRIVAN: It is
difficult for science,
because the methodology of
science for 300 years has said,
look, I'm a scientist, I'm
going to experiment on this.
I'm going to look at this.
I'm going to try
and understand it.
And science is very good--
that methodology is great--
at taking stuff apart and
trying to find what makes it up,
what its constituents are--
smaller and smaller and smaller.
But rather like-- and he'll
hate me for saying this.
My brother used to be
really good at taking things
like watches and clocks
apart, but he could never
put them back together again.
[LAUGHTER]
And I think that
scientific methodology's
great at taking the bits apart.
But as Deepak Chopra
once said, it's
like taking a radio
apart, and then wondering
where the music's gone to.
And that's now changing,
but it's quite a leap.
And also it requires
modifications
to the scientific
methodologies that are still
at their very early stages.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
And quantum
physicists are really
considered kind of the
outcasts and renegades
of the world of science for
the most part anyway, right?
>> CURRIVAN: To a degree.
But the other part
of that, they're
like sort of honored geeks.
Because everybody knows that
at the most fundamental level,
the quantum understanding is
crucial to our understanding
of physical reality.
The problem with the
quantum physicists
are that quantum
physics describes
the behavior of
energy and matter,
and now we know
they're equivalent.
But the problem with
that is energy and matter
have no sense of time.
They don't care
whether something
runs that way or that way.
So the quantum physicists
don't really, in the main,
understand the nature of time.
What investigates time
is relativity theory.
And you need to actually,
in my perspective--
and this is what I've
done in the book--
if you restate the laws of
physics as laws of information,
and if you start
even further back,
back into the mid-19th
century with something called
thermodynamics, which is
the behavior of gases,
you can bring all of the
discoveries since then--
quantum and relativity--
and actually understand
that when you restate those
two laws of thermodynamics
to two laws of
information, you get
quantum mechanics
and relativity theory
as free- you get them for free--
and you can reconcile them.
>> REGINA: Yes.
And reconciliation has been
really your dharma of sorts.
I mean, you've been trying
to reconcile philosophy,
physics, science, spirituality.
That's a tall task,
but you really
have been successful in this.
What was it
personally in you that
needed this deep reconciliation
yourself to create--
because there is a type
of cognitive dissonance
when you have an experience.
And you say, I
know this is real,
but then your background
says, no, this is not real.
And it can create a
cognitive dissonance.
And I know a lot of
scientists suffer from this,
because others have
too had experiences.
>> CURRIVAN: Exactly right.
And I think that's
very important.
For me, I never had the
cognitive dissonance,
because I started so young.
It was like a dance
of exploration.
And realizing that to
dance, I needed both legs.
I needed both left hemisphere
and right hemisphere.
But also, I never
felt-- and, of course,
when you go back to ancient
times and the sacred science
of the Egyptians and the sacred
science of the Vedic sages
of India, we're now describing--
and in "The Cosmic Hologram"
I'm describing-- something that
the ancient Vedic sages would
have recognized.
Because they refer
to it as Indra's Net.
So now we're almost
looping back,
but we're going
forward to realize
that those ancients had
immense intuitive experiential
insights.
We've moved forward.
We've also taken a
bit of a side route--
>> REGINA: Into a world
of extreme materialism.
>> CURRIVAN:
Extreme materialism.
And it's because our
beliefs drive our behaviors
that extreme materialism
and that myth of separation
has driven our
dysfunctional behavior.
So I suppose my work at the
end of the day, as you say,
is to reconcile and to heal our
world view from a fragmented
perspective into a
whole world view, where
all that we are, all that we
experience, all that we embody
is part of that greater
understanding of reality.
>> REGINA: Well, and also
because we have taken that dive
into scientific materialism,
all the way down to the bottom
of that well.
We need that language and the
common vernacular for people
to trust what you're saying.
>> CURRIVAN: That
is so important.
Because so many people have
been what Ken Wilber talks,
waking up and growing
up and showing up--
and Dustin, as well, DiPerna,
talks about cleaning up--
over these years through
the whole awakening process
and the shift of awareness.
But for many, many,
many others, who
perhaps haven't had direct
experiences, which often drives
that journey, is show me the
evidence, show me the evidence.
And until now, science,
with all of its insights,
has not really
shown the evidence.
So I wanted to write
this book for 60 years.
But I couldn't
write it until now,
because I need to amass
all that evidence--
not just the physics and the
cosmology, but across biology,
whole systems theory--
all scales.
>> REGINA: Everything.
You've done it.
>> CURRIVAN: Thank you.
>> REGINA: Let's get into it.
You use the word information
hyphenated-- in-formation.
>> CURRIVAN: That's right.
>> REGINA: Just start
from there-- why?
>> CURRIVAN: Because we think
we know what information is,
because information is the
basis of all our technologies.
And what we do is
with information, we--
for example, now
in our interview,
the camera is taking
photographs of us
from the light reflected on it.
It's transferring
all that information
into digitized bits--
ones and zeros.
Anything in reality
can be described
in strings of ones and zeros,
but those ones and zeros
of themselves are data.
It's not really meaningful,
unless we put it together.
So instead of just
saying information,
which you could think
of as just being
random data, by hyphenating
in-formation, what I'm saying
is our universe and everything
in it is not random.
It is interrelation.
It is dynamic.
It is meaningful.
It is essentially
alive, way beyond
the biological term of that.
And so it's patterned.
It's intentionally patterned
and meaningful and purposeful.
So it's like, if we
have an alphabet--
A and B and C-- they have
no meaning of themselves.
But if we start to put
them together in words,
and then we start to put those
words in terms of sentences,
and those sentences in terms
of poems and plays and songs,
then that's meaningful.
So our universe,
essentially, is a song.
It is a meaningful song
that exists and evolves--
>> REGINA: It has harmonics.
It has a melody.
>> CURRIVAN: Yes.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
I just love the way
your mind works.
So you're saying that
universal physicality
is a matter of the flows
of this information
in various processes
of creation.
So for people who are
visual, paint a picture--
or make a song, either one--
[LAUGHTER]
>> CURRIVAN: You
don't hear me sing.
[LAUGHTER]
>> REGINA: --of how this
flows, what this looks like.
>> CURRIVAN: Well, perhaps we
can go back to have a sense
of its beginning, 13.8
billion years ago.
Because we know that
our universe began as--
and now, and what I'm saying
in "The Cosmic Hologram,"
is that our universe, and other
universes perhaps, are finite.
They're finite entities
in an infinity,
an eternity of cosmic mind.
And actually, Stephen
Hawking posthumously
has just published a paper with
a Dutch professor, Professor
Thomas Hertog, saying that our
universe is finite and closed,
which is additional evidence
to what I'm saying in the book.
But our universe began not as a
big bang, because we think of--
>> REGINA: I agree.
>> CURRIVAN: --big
bang as big and bang.
>> REGINA: Right.
You call it the big breath.
>> CURRIVAN: I do.
>> REGINA: I love this.
Now, share this with
us, and we'll go forward
into that other question later.
>> CURRIVAN: OK, because the big
breath actually perhaps begins
to answer that earlier question.
Because instead of chaos,
it was exquisitely ordered
and fine-tuned.
So literally, as
the ancients said,
it's a big breath with time
flowing and space expanding.
So everything is
interconnected in the most
exquisitely-balanced way that
literally enables our universe
to exist, but more so to evolve.
So from that beginning
simplicity, ever greater levels
of complexity and ever greater
levels of self-awareness
at these individuated
microcosmic levels, such as us,
so we can look back
13.8 billion years ago.
Everything that makes
us up, all the energy
and matter in our universe,
was there at the beginning,
will be there at the end.
It's just changed form.
I hate to say it, Regina.
But you and I are both
13.8 billion years old.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> CURRIVAN: --in that sense.
We are.
So we have a lineage
as human beings
that literally goes back to the
beginning of the big breath.
>> REGINA: And yet you
say at the same time--
so this is where people have to
try to get their minds around,
because I love this topic, I
find it absolutely beautiful--
in the sense there was nothing.
And then you have
the logos informing
the prima materia, the
primordial essence of matter,
to create everything.
>> CURRIVAN: Yes.
>> REGINA: How does that work?
>> CURRIVAN: Basically,
because first of all,
we understand that what we call
physical solidity is incredibly
ephemeral.
And then when physicists
have drilled down
to tinier and tinier scales,
to atomic scales and smaller,
we realize that everything
we call solid materiality
is 99.999999.
>> REGINA: Exactly, 9999.
>> CURRIVAN: "No-thing-ness."
>> REGINA: Nothing, yes, space.
>> CURRIVAN: And what remains
is actually relational
excitations.
But the key to this--
and I'm taking it over
the bridge as it were--
is that we also
realize information
is as physically
real as anything
we call energy and matter.
And there have been experiments
to show this recently.
Some years ago,
theorists were already
showing or really
hypothesizing that when
we stored or deleted
one bit of information
that it involved physical
parameters, such as work
and heat.
And more recently, we've been
able to experimentally show
that.
So we know that it's
not just the way
that digitized
information is held
and comes into friction with
cables or anything else.
No.
It's the information itself is
as physically real as anything
we call energy and matter.
So information is more
fundamental than energy matter.
It's more fundamental
than spacetime.
It's expressed in
complementary ways as both,
but it shows how that deeper,
fundamental consciousness,
intelligence of the cosmos,
can give rise to a thought
form that is our universe.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
So if we're looking at it
through a material lens
so to speak, we can see atomic
functioning particles and so
forth, but we're
made up of space.
So what is the space?
>> CURRIVAN: The space is
consciousness, essentially.
>> REGINA: Yes, exactly.
>> CURRIVAN: The space
is consciousness.
>> REGINA: That's where the
information is flowing through.
>> CURRIVAN: Exactly.
It is.
>> REGINA: It is the space.
It is, yes.
>> CURRIVAN: It is.
Because your mind
and consciousness
isn't something we have, it's
what we in the whole world are.
Which is really the
last piece of the book
before I go onto the second and
third books in the trilogy--
[LAUGHTER]
--that are yet to come.
>> REGINA: Yes.
OK, so you explain that
the geometrical formations
of the universe are 2D.
>> CURRIVAN: Yeah.
>> REGINA: OK, explain this.
Because people-- again,
I'm particularly visual.
And when I first entered the
world of quantum research
about 30 years ago, I
found it fascinating,
because I could see it
in my own mind's eye.
I closed my eyes,
and I could see
what they were talking about.
So for all of our
viewers who, like me,
are quite visual in
our understanding,
explain what this means.
>> CURRIVAN: I'll be delighted.
>> REGINA: 2D, because it's
fundamental to our evolution.
Why 2D?
What's this look like?
Why 2D, when we think
of the world in 3D?
And now we think of
dimensions as something--
well, in the context
of new age thinking,
it can be anything--
angels flowing
in from the 13th dimension
and on and on and on.
And so let's just do the
basics on what 2D is--
>> CURRIVAN: Let's do
the basics of this.
>> REGINA: --and
then move to 3D, OK?
>> CURRIVAN: Absolutely.
And then we can play in
whatever level is beyond that.
I think the other
important point you made,
which is really important,
is so many people are visual.
And in my experience,
people, now,
as we are so
collectively waking up,
are having visual experiences
of geometrical forms.
>> REGINA: Yes, oh, absolutely.
>> CURRIVAN: And, of course, the
ancient geometers who just had
a straight edge and the rest
of it understood and curetted
the nature of reality
and geometric forms.
God is a great geometer.
But for them, it was the
idealized forms of triangles
and circles and squares.
And now we're realizing
through massive amounts
of computer analysis,
that instead
of these idealized forms,
that the makeup of the world
is indeed geometric.
But it's what's called fractals.
So they scale up
and they scale down,
just as idealized geometries do.
But they are the
shapes of clouds.
They are the underpinning
happenings that pervades
not just the natural
world of ecosystems--
we have the same
fractal patterns
at the scale of the atom, and
up to 3 billion light years
across.
>> REGINA: As above, so below.
>> CURRIVAN: Woo-hoo.
Absolutely.
But also through our
so-called man-made patterns.
The way we socially behave
with each other, whether it's
surfing the net, using our
mobile phones, or conflicts,
their relationships
actually embody
exactly the same
fractal patterns
as do ecosystems and earthquakes
and galaxies and atoms,
which is amazing.
>> REGINA: It is amazing
when you think about it.
How do you get these
different outcomes
from the same geometry?
>> CURRIVAN: Einstein
said, as simple as can be,
but no simpler.
That's exactly it.
You get complexity
from simplicity.
But you made the
point about 2D-ness.
I love, that despite
this route of science
really focusing into technology,
that it's actually technology
that I feel is now
predisposing us
to remember the
interconnectivity and
relational nature of reality.
>> REGINA: Interesting
way to put it.
Yes.
>> CURRIVAN: And I think this
is happening through virtual
realities.
And I think it's happening
through holograms.
Because I'd like to explain the
2D-ness and the 3D-ness with
holograms.
Because what a hologram does is
it shines a light on an object,
any object.
It could be this cup of tea.
It could be you.
It could be anything.
It captures the information
from that 3D object,
and it projects it on a
two-dimensional film or screen.
So all the data's captured,
but that 3D object is now
captured on a 2D screen.
Then, when a light is shone
through that 2D screen,
the 3D hologram of the
object is projected.
And we're now coming
to a point where
we can have
immersive holography,
and people can move
around holograms,
and with ultrasonics, can
actually touch holograms.
So we're getting more and
more familiar with reality, 3D
reality, through 2D holograms--
>> REGINA: Being projected.
>> CURRIVAN: --recreated
as an apparent 3D object.
The universe does it in reverse.
Some years ago, when black holes
were beginning to be studied,
there was a big
debate as to what
happened when a star collapsed
under its own weight.
And it needed to be a massive
star under its own weight.
The force of gravity
was so strong
that it continued to fall
in on itself beyond a point,
called the event horizon,
where even light could escape--
hence, black hole.
But the question then was, what
happened to all the information
in the star?
And what it was realized, is
that instead of being lost,
it is held on the surface
area of the black hole.
And the surface area of a
black hole-- think of a sphere,
think of a black hole as a
sphere in the event horizon--
that all that
information-- garbled,
but all the information--
is held on that surface area.
Now, what cosmologists
have done is
they've taken that example
and then extended it
to the whole of our
universe to suggest
that the whole of our
universe, essentially,
is a holographic projection
through its 2D boundary.
>> REGINA: Oh, OK.
I see what you're saying.
Yes.
>> CURRIVAN: So what we
experience as apparent 3D-ness
is actually a 2D
holographic projection.
And all the leading edge
theorists trying to do this
reconciliation of quantum theory
and relativity are finding that
they're converging on
the same perspective--
it's called a
holographic principle--
where the appearance of 3D
reality, physical reality,
is actually a projection
of two-dimensional boundary
of spacetime.
And that boundary,
rather like a hologram,
is pixelated with
the information.
But the scale of the pixelation
of spacetime is a trillion,
trillion times smaller
than our finest holograms.
>> REGINA: Oh my god.
That is very difficult
to get one's mind around.
>> CURRIVAN: They're actually
a trillion times smaller.
And it's called
this Planck scale.
And with the Planck
scale, when we
put all the forces of
our universe together,
this Planck scale, this
measure of space and time
and energy and matter
and temperature,
just naturally fall out.
And they'd fall out whether
we were measuring them here
on Earth or in a galaxy far, far
away in a long, long time ago.
>> REGINA: OK.
Now, this is just flowing
in out of nowhere.
So we're going to take a little
side trip for just a moment,
and then go back into more
of the linear progression
of this conversation.
I remember years ago-- and I
can't tell you whether it was
a dream or a crossover state--
I was looking at information--
information being stored
and where information is.
And the thing that showed up--
and at the time, visually, it
made a lot of sense to me--
is essentially it was a
grid with vector points.
And there was a certain
resonance at vector points
that would almost grab or
contain pixels of information
and hold it there to be
stored and then reactivated
when needed or necessary.
Does that make any sense
within this picture?
>> CURRIVAN: It does.
Because I'm not saying that
the boundary of spacetime
is spherical, but it's
easy to visualize.
My sense is we'll find
that it is a torus.
>> REGINA: Yes.
Yes, that makes sense.
>> CURRIVAN: But let's
look at it as a sphere,
just because it's
easier to visualize.
The idea of the pixelation of
the information of everything
that is being, that has happened
in our universe till now,
is pixelated at
this Planck scale
with one bit of information
at each Planck scale area.
And the Planck scale
areas are triangular.
>> REGINA: Oh, it's interesting.
I was seeing it as a grid,
at these grid points,
but it's actually triangular.
>> CURRIVAN: Yeah,
the pixelation--
>> REGINA: But it's
still at the points?
>> CURRIVAN: Yes.
>> REGINA: That's
what I was seeing.
>> CURRIVAN: Essentially it is.
So the idea also of the
akasha and the Akashic record
is very much part of that.
Because one of the reasons that
I describe in the book for,
why does space expand?
If you think of our universe--
again, think of it as spherical
and think of it as a balloon.
So it began 13.8 billion years
ago at its smallest scale,
rather like blowing
up a balloon--
the big breath.
Time flows, because
the flow of time
is the accumulation
of information.
There was less information
in our universe
yesterday than there is
today and there is tomorrow.
But all that
information is being
held at the boundary
of spacetime,
the surface of the balloon.
So space has to expand,
so more and more and more.
It's not that the
pixels grow bigger--
more and more of them
come into existence.
So what this does is allow
our universe not just
to exist, but to evolve.
Because it's that
learning process.
>> REGINA: And to expand.
>> CURRIVAN: It has
to expand to evolve.
Because time, the flow of time,
and the expansion of space--
which is why spacetime
have to be put together--
enables our universe to evolve.
>> REGINA: And there are
logarithmic patterns that play
into this, so let's get
into that part of it.
Because, again, when we go
to the digital language,
people understand that.
>> CURRIVAN: They do.
They do.
And logarithms are
musical, in a sense.
They're frequencies.
They double, they-- whatever
the base of the log is,
you're doubling or you're
increasing at a different rate.
But fractals are innately both
logarithmic and holographic.
And the physics
and the mathematics
of the hologram and fractals
and logarithms is innate.
It's absolutely as one.
And it does explain and
underpin the laws of physics.
But the other thing, talking
about algorithms and all
of this, is that the laws
of physics themselves
are algorithms.
They're instructions
to our universe
as to how to exist and evolve.
And they, themselves, are
the simplest they could be.
Which is why in the
book, I track these two
laws of thermodynamics to two
laws of informational info
dynamics.
But in that is the
whole of physics.
In that is the whole of physics.
Because the first law,
which talks about energy,
we expand it to
energy and matter.
And it basically ends up saying
that all information expressed
as energy matter in our
universe is conserved.
In other words, it changes its
form, but it remains the same.
>> REGINA: Yes, but it remains.
Yes.
>> CURRIVAN: But it's the
second law that's the clincher--
and that's quantum physics.
>> REGINA: Yes, Yes.
>> CURRIVAN: The second law is
really the key or the clincher.
Because the second
law of thermodynamics
says that the
entropy of a system,
a closed system, always
increases through time.
Now, 150 years ago--
>> REGINA: And explain the
word entropy for people.
>> CURRIVAN: I will do this now.
>> REGINA: Because there is
a lot of misunderstanding.
>> CURRIVAN: Absolutely.
And this is one
of the key things
that we need to clear up.
People often think of
entropy as order to disorder.
But actually, when
Ludwig Boltzmann first
looked at this
concept of entropy
in his behavior of gases,
he said, no, no, it's
the microstates of a system.
In other words, how
many ways can a system
be organized within itself?
So for example, if I
have a pack of cards,
and I take them out of
the cellophane pack,
they're in order.
OK?
Throw them up in the air,
they land all over the place.
That's not just a disorder, but
it's more states of a system.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> CURRIVAN: If I take this
cup, which is quite ordered--
and delicious tea within
it, thank you very much--
and knock it over-- which
I'm very capable of doing--
it doesn't go from
order to disorder,
but it actually has more
microstates in that system.
There's more
environmental connection.
It spills on the carpet.
I hope it doesn't
spill on your trousers.
>> REGINA: It's
implicated in much more.
>> CURRIVAN: Much more.
Much more.
But by restating the
entropy of a system
instead of the number of
microstates of it, as in a gas,
more recently
information theorists
have shown the same equation
that Boltzmann came up
with is exactly the
same as that to describe
the informational
content of a system.
So if we think of this cup,
if it was a closed system,
has so much information,
but then spills everywhere,
and we see this room
as a bigger system,
then actually that spilled
cup has more information.
And if we were to actually
video that spilling,
we'd know from just
looking at the video which
way time flowed.
Because the time will always
flow from less information
content to more information.
>> REGINA: Oh, interesting.
I've never heard entropy
explained this way.
>> CURRIVAN: And that
is the flow of time.
And that's what "The Cosmic
Hologram" is all about.
It's the flow of time itself
and the expansion of space
when pulled together
in relativity
that are the second
law when it's
restated from thermodynamics
to information info dynamics.
So we've got the first law
now as a description-- quantum
theory, energy matter.
You've got the second
law now as a description
of relativity and spacetime.
But they're both restated
in terms of information.
And that's the reconciliation.
>> REGINA: Now, this is another
one of those non-sequiturs,
in that, when you're
speaking, I'm listening to you
and feeling this incredible
harmony in the story that
you're putting forward--
a kind of coherence, right?
And then I think
of human beings.
And I think, what is it?
We seem to be living out
of sync with almost all
of these kind of flows of
information in certain ways.
That's kind of a
rough way to put it,
but do you know what I'm saying?
Thus, there's so much disease
and dysfunction and disorder
and lack of harmony.
>> CURRIVAN: I guess part of
my curiosity in life has been
to go back--
as well as looking forward
and being present--
is to look back as
early as I could--
and perhaps some of
our hidden history.
And there are many
spiritual traditions,
there are many wisdom
teachings, there
are many metaphysical
teachings that
suggest that our psyche,
our collective psyche,
goes through cycles of
remembering and dismembering.
[LAUGHS]
And my sense is that we've
been through a process--
an exciting process--
of taking our, if you
like, our materialistic
curiosity to its extreme.
But as a result, we've been
dismembering our psyche.
And my sense is that actually,
now, we have the opportunity.
Because so many
threads are converging.
It's all of this
we're talking about.
There are so many other
threads that are converging.
People are waking up.
And so my sense is that this is
a great time of us remembering
who we really are.
>> REGINA: Yeah,
I agree with that.
And we'll probably do something
toward that end at the end
of this conversation.
OK, getting back on track again,
Darwin's theory of evolution
and the notion of
emergent phenomena
and what inspires that.
And I will say a couple
of days ago I interviewed
Rupert Sheldrake again--
and the whole notion of
morphogenetic fields.
And even going further than
that, what is inspiring
that passed on memory or
the emergent phenomena
to create a species
to begin with?
>> CURRIVAN: Well, I'm
a great fan of Rupert.
I think he's a wonderful work
and has been an incredibly
courageous pioneer of this.
And you can actually
see what he's
saying in the context,
the bigger picture context
of "The Cosmic Hologram."
Because what we
have is a universe
that exists and evolves
as a unified entity.
And the accumulation of
the past has been a process
from simplicity to complexity.
But the progress of
emergence, I think,
is a really interesting one.
Because what it's
suggesting is that there
is a potentiality of
templating for what
is becoming more coherent.
And there's something
called flickering
in systems theory, where we look
at how complex systems change.
They exist on the
edge of order chaos.
And that actually
is very sensible,
because that's their
greatest flexibility.
It actually gives them a
level of stability, too.
But the point is that when
a system is being pushed
by various factors beyond
that edge of stability,
two things can happen.
It either breaks
down into chaos.
But even in that chaos,
there's little whirlpools
of potential resurgence.
But also what happens is
there's another, what's called,
an attractor.
Because this is an attractor
basin of that, whatever
it may be, an ecosystem.
And it's like a bowl of water.
If the bowl of water is quite
full, but is reasonably stable,
the water doesn't
slosh all over.
But if it becomes
less and less stable,
the water's going everywhere
and it's starting to break down.
At the same time, what
happens in emergent processes,
there's a higher level of
possibility being crystallized,
being potentized.
But not in the physical.
This is at the level
that's pre-physicalized.
So what's happening
with us at the moment
is we have all of this
materialistic, duality-based
perspective and the
behaviors, and we're
like an ecosystem that's
no longer healthy.
And yet at the same time,
there are enough people
awakening and becoming aware
and becoming more coherent
that this higher level attractor
is starting to potentize.
And then what
happens in emergence
is the systems
flicker between them.
It's about me trying
to give up chocolate.
I'm really good for a day, and
I'll go to the high level--
the chocolate-- but then
I'll come back to this level.
[LAUGHTER]
So it's that flickering between.
But the more this
emergent potential
is being crystallized, and it's
consciousness, then the more
that that old system,
instead of breaking down,
can break through.
And so what we find
with the emergence
and biological
emergence is that if we
take the history of Gaia,
our beloved planetary home,
evolution--
I love evolution-- a bit lazy,
does the least needed, right?
So in times of real stability,
there's very little evolution.
But if those changes,
like the natural changes
in the ice ages, there's
changes in speciation.
But it's slower.
But then, when there's an
extinction event or something
absolutely
catastrophic, what we've
discovered after the five
previous ones is that there's
this amazing resurgence--
incredible, new emergent
forms of awareness and
intelligence and evolution.
So evolutionary processes
and emergent processes
are all aspects of
consciousness, experience,
and exploring itself.
But like me on a
day under the duvet,
I ain't going to evolve if
everything's easy-peasy.
[LAUGHTER]
>> REGINA: That is true.
We need a little push.
We need a little friction
in order to move, generally.
People do.
>> CURRIVAN: And a pull.
There's that sense
of a pull, as well.
>> REGINA: Yes.
OK, let's talk about the
impulse behind all of it.
If we're talking about the
mind behind the mind, if we're
talking about the hidden
logos, an organizing
principle of thought that
must precede everything
to create the coherence
that, as you say,
that starts putting energy
into energy or information
into motion.
>> CURRIVAN: Exactly.
What I would say is
everything that I've
experienced all my life, but
certainly the perspective
I'm putting forward in
"The Cosmic Hologram,"
is the past is the past, which
is this whole understanding
of akasha and space expanding.
So all that is being
is memorialized
is the learning of our universe.
But the future is not fixed.
The future is not deterministic.
The future is yet to be written.
But we know that the
experiments that, for example,
a friend and colleague,
Dean Radin, of mine
has done at IONS, and many
others, and precognitive
experiences--
>> REGINA: Yes, I've
been in his workshops.
It's really fun.
>> CURRIVAN: It's great.
>> REGINA: It's really
interesting to see how
functional his
theories actually are.
>> CURRIVAN: Absolutely.
And he's just given me a lovely
endorsement for the book,
because he knows
that what this is
is the emergent bigger picture
framework that absolutely
validates what he's been
finding, and many, many others.
So the future is
becoming crystallized
as it comes to the
present moment.
But that potentizing,
that potentiality,
those new attractors of
greater coherence of emergence
are potentizing, and
not in the physical,
but in this more
foundational realm
of possibility and experience
and evolutionary impulse.
So as they crystallize,
they come to us
so that that template is there
just before we essentially
step into it.
>> REGINA: Yes.
And that would be, so to
speak, a co-creative reality.
>> CURRIVAN: Very much.
>> REGINA: But is there
something that precedes
the co-creative reality?
Is there a great mind
within-- or many great minds
within the cosmos that have the
potential of visioning thought
at a certain level
that's perhaps
beyond our comprehension, a
certain level of creativity?
Just as our level
of creativity would
be probably foreign to an ant.
>> CURRIVAN: Yes, I mean,
Einstein talked about cosmic
mind.
And that's very much
my perspective--
that everything
we call reality--
and many realities we
have no comprehension of--
but the source of all
being is an infinite
and eternal cosmic mind and that
universes are finite thought
forms.
>> REGINA: Yes, exactly.
>> CURRIVAN: --in that
infinite eternal mind.
>> REGINA: But that word gets
basically translated into many
other words, and that's where
science becomes frightened.
>> CURRIVAN: Yes.
And my sense is that
science has an opportunity
to be really part
of the solution.
Because, for me, this is
so exciting and has so many
opportunities for
science to grow up--
as well as us growing
up, collectively--
I feel science itself and its
methodologies can grow up.
And there is a way forward.
Another friend of mine,
Professor Max Velmans,
wrote a book called
"Understanding Consciousness."
And he wrote in
that how we could
expand the scientific
methodology
to be both the first person
and the third person.
Because the problem
is that science
has just tried to see
everything from a third person
perspective.
But we now realize, as
everything is interconnected
and reality is
essentially unified,
that we have to
actually bring together
that first person perspective of
reality with that third person.
And, of course, you and
I could change places.
If I was a scientist trying to
understand what was going on
within you or how
you see the world,
you would have your
first person perspective,
I would have the third
person, looking at you
and measuring you and whatever
I would or hearing your story.
But we could swap places--
you could put the white coat on
and I could sit in your jeans.
And you could be the scientist
saying, oh, I can measure this.
I can see this.
Now, Jude, what are
you experiencing?
We need to bring them together.
And there's a scientific
way of doing that, but it's
a science that recognizes
that consciousness
isn't what we have, it's what
we in the hard world are.
>> REGINA: Are.
And this has been perturbing
to a lot of scientists,
because it's a missing element.
Consciousness is the
answer to the solution
they're looking for, but
they will not go there.
And it almost seems
as though as long
as we remain within a
materialistic reference--
>> CURRIVAN: We can't.
>> REGINA: --that you can have
somehow control and mastery
over the material world.
And if you look
to something that
is far greater in its
thought form capabilities,
you would be reduced
to something less than
rather than understanding
you're a co-creative part
of that very thing, and you
can even be more than anything
the material world
ever had to offer you
in your systems of
control as a scientist.
>> CURRIVAN: Exactly.
And not just as a scientist, but
as a person, as a human being.
>> REGINA: And as a person.
Right, of course.
>> CURRIVAN: Because I
think this is exactly that.
This is so empowering.
Materialistic reductionism
and this myth of separation--
>> REGINA: It's so limiting.
>> CURRIVAN: --it's so limiting.
And when we are able to
understand this and experience
it and embody it--
my goodness.
I just feel as a
species, we're like when
you and I were three years old,
and it was first day of school.
And we hadn't even
learned about writing,
let alone joined up writing.
So as a species, we have
gone through these spirals
of remembering, dismembering.
And I hope and trust that we're
on this verge of remembering.
But this remembering, I feel,
is a leap of conscious evolution
that is--
I can't even really
imagine what it could be.
But even to really
become galactic humans,
universal humans,
actual, conscious,
microcosmic creators
with our universe's
evolutionary impulse.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
And looking at these waves
of consciousness-- expansion,
contraction, remembering,
dismembering--
hundreds of years ago, the
scientists were philosophers--
>> CURRIVAN: Indeed, they were.
>> REGINA: --by nature.
>> CURRIVAN: They were called
natural philosophers before
they were called scientists.
>> REGINA: And so what
that did is it gave context
to their discoveries.
>> CURRIVAN: Yes.
>> REGINA: And that is what's
been lost in modern science.
>> CURRIVAN: Very much.
And the pioneers, both of
relativity and quantum physics,
were generally
natural philosophers.
Max Planck, for instance,
Einstein, of course,
and many others--
Planck talked about
mind being primary.
I think he absolutely understood
they're not just primary,
but is, you know?
Everything is mine.
John Archibald Wheeler, who
coined the term black holes,
talked of it.
In other words, the appearance,
the physical world, from bit--
from digitized information.
And now we're realizing
that it is bit.
So there have been
scientists and pioneers
all the way through who have
really not just reconciled,
but fully integrated
this perspective.
And yet, I think you're
absolutely right.
We know this.
I think the thing that happens,
and certainly over the last few
generations-- and it was
certainly beginning when I was
at Oxford back in
the early '70s--
was this use of science
to support technologies.
And, in fact, scientists became
more and more technologists.
And there was a
survey done recently
of quantum physicists asking
what their interest was
in the nature of reality.
And a disturbingly
high proportion
said they didn't care.
And these are
quantum physicists.
>> REGINA: Ooh, ooh, ooh.
>> CURRIVAN: These are the
geeks of geeks, you know?
>> REGINA: That's dangerous.
>> CURRIVAN: And if quantum
physicists don't have
a curiosity and a willingness
to go where the evidence leads,
in terms of the
nature of reality,
the other scientists just
fall off the back of that.
That is dangerous.
And I was both saddened
to hear that, but also I
think the younger physicists--
physicists and scientists get
in because they are curious.
But often they're told, and
they're in environments,
that they're not allowed
to follow the evidence.
Because it's going
to lead to places
that the vested interests
and the people with status
and all the rest of it
don't want it to go.
And Thomas Kuhn, of course--
[LAUGHS]---- who coined the word
paradigm shift talked about
paradigm shifts progressing
through funerals.
I hope we don't need to do that,
because this is too urgent.
This is too important.
This isn't about just science.
It's about all of us.
How do we live our lives?
How do we see ourselves
in each other?
>> REGINA: Well, I have
great faith in the younger
generation-- the millennials
and younger, in particular.
>> CURRIVAN: Me too.
>> REGINA: Because they're not
necessarily buying the status
quo on any level anymore,
and so their minds are free
to contemplate these things.
I don't think it'll take the
death of their forerunners.
They're going to
go there anyway.
>> CURRIVAN: I agree.
And I think that's what, for
me, is so exciting, that I'm
realizing.
And I think we were talking
earlier, there are so many
shoots off this, what I
call, a unity awareness.
And unity consciousness is
really gaining traction.
>> REGINA: So let's look at the
notion that our reality is more
and more being likened to
a gigantic computer model
of reality, randomly
generated information,
as a computer model.
Because more people
are understanding that,
that this is a digital reality.
That it is an illusion.
That what we see and
experience is an illusion.
Let's talk about the
difference in the way
you see that, quote,
"illusion," versus the way
that the people that are
looking at it in a digital sense
see that illusion.
>> CURRIVAN: Well, first of all,
I'd argue the word illusion.
Because often
people say the word
"maya," which is an
ancient Indian word that
can be translated as illusion.
It can also be
translated as partial.
>> REGINA: Oh, interesting.
Yes.
>> CURRIVAN: Yes.
And so my sense is that
as we sort of wake up
to this larger
understanding of reality,
we realize that the material
realm is just partial.
It's a realm of consciousness
experiencing itself
and learning and growing
and all the rest of it.
So I would not say that the
physical world isn't real--
it is real.
What isn't real, what
is truly an illusion,
is the appearance of separation.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> CURRIVAN: And yet separation
of the appearance of separation
is also how we learn
from each other.
>> REGINA: Well, we have
to learn through some kind
of contrast.
>> CURRIVAN: Exactly.
Exactly.
>> REGINA: If there's
nothing but it and self,
how would we learn?
>> CURRIVAN: I don't know that
we could or can't even have
a sense.
>> REGINA: No.
>> CURRIVAN: So let's not sort
of say, oh, separations are--
it isn't.
It's when we get into
a mindset that that's
all there is and we
really are separate,
and to get that extreme
materialism so that we
forget the ultimate
unity and oneness
and think that the
separation is just the thing,
then we act from that
place of separation.
And so, when we
remember the unity,
but come from a place
of unity and diversity--
because unity and
consciousness loves diversity.
Because again, it's
the maximum opportunity
to experience and learn
and grow and evolve.
But it's when we mistake
that unity and diversity
for separation that's the issue.
>> REGINA: That's an interesting
kind of line to play.
Because on one level,
a lot of people,
and a lot of people
watching this interview,
are really looking to go
into the experience of unity,
of non-separation,
of non-duality
through meditative practices
and so forth, and visualize
being a drop in the
ocean that's merging
with all of the other
drops in the ocean.
And thus, also shunning our
material physical reality.
>> CURRIVAN: Exactly.
>> REGINA: And we can't do that.
This is where we
learn, is through
the contrast in this reality.
So I'd love for you to tell
us, on a personal level, how
you utilize and bridge these
two processes and potentials
and also gifts of being human.
>> CURRIVAN: I
feel this is vital,
because you're absolutely right.
We've got one aspect in
our collective psyche
that is still in the
materialistic appearance
of separation.
We've got another growing
aspect of our psyche, which
is going in that inner sense.
And as we go within, we remember
that's our natural connectivity
with the nature of reality.
The danger, as well
as the opportunity
of that in a journey,
is that we pull away
from the ostensibly
outer journey.
And so for me, it's how do we
balance the inner and outer?
Realizing that they are
just different sides
of the same coin of
overall unified reality.
And both are vital--
remembering the oneness of the
ocean, but also appreciating
and honoring the
individuation of the droplet.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> CURRIVAN: And if we went
from a process of nothing is
accidental, everything is
meaningful and purposeful,
cosmic mind didn't co-create
the appearance of all of this,
just so that we could
go into a gray gloop.
>> REGINA: Exactly.
This is the way I
have always seen it.
We are still individuated
consciousness, even
within the ocean.
We retain our
individuation and integrity
of the uniqueness that is
our signature, energetically.
>> CURRIVAN: Exactly.
And that gives us meaning
and purpose, both as
that individuated
microcosmic co-creator
of the intelligence
of our universe
and the infinite
and eternal cosmos.
And it also supports and
nurtures our remembering
of that ultimate unity.
So it's very much,
how do we turn
from the collective perspective
of just material separation,
just turn around and
look the other way?
And we, instead of coming
from materialistic separation,
we come from unity,
but expressed
through the most incredible
abundance of diversity.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
Because it is about bringing
harmony between self and other,
that is the ultimate joy and
should be the ultimate goal
of being alive and being human.
Then you're actually
sensing that unity while
in these individuated
physical forms.
>> CURRIVAN: Exactly.
I talk about me and we and all.
And this is head, heart,
and hands understanding
and experiencing, embodying
unity awareness, unity
consciousness, through exactly
this relational with ourselves,
with each other, with
our beloved Gaia,
with the whole cosmos.
You started on this-- and this
is where I get very grumpy--
is this interpretation
as we're a simulation.
>> REGINA: Exactly, yeah.
>> CURRIVAN: I get
really grumpy with that.
>> REGINA: Because people
read all this and say,
is that what we are?
Is that all we are, then?
No.
>> CURRIVAN: No.
I just feel that
, that is again,
that's a very technological
perspective of duality-based
awareness.
>> REGINA: And very limiting.
>> CURRIVAN: It's very
limiting, very disempowering.
Because it's saying,
not only do you not
have meaning and
purpose, but you
are the play thing of some
simulation games player
somewhere.
And it's still
very duality-based,
because you're just kicking
the ball down the road.
If there's an advanced
species of which we're--
what about the advanced species?
Where does the simulation start?
It never begins.
>> REGINA: Thank you.
Thank you for that,
because people
are left with that question,
what is creating what?
Who is creating whom?
And so forth.
And I love the way you put it.
So do people find when
they read your book, do
they find this work liberating?
Because that's the first word
that comes to mind for me.
>> CURRIVAN: Yes, they do.
The book's a messenger.
The book's saying,
guys, what we thought--
[LAUGHTER]
--what we thought we knew
about the nature of reality
is not what it is.
Here's a much bigger and
unifying and empowering
invitation to join this journey
and homecoming of oneness
and diversity.
So the reception
has been phenomenal.
And interesting enough, we're
sitting across from the place
where the book was launched
a year ago, which is
the House of Lords in London.
>> REGINA: Is that right?
>> CURRIVAN: Well, it was
launched at the United Nations
in New York in May last year.
>> REGINA: Tell us about
that launching and why.
>> CURRIVAN: Because I felt
that this was much more than
a scientific revolution.
That if we came to understand
and experience and embody unity
awareness in the books-- the
evidence across all scales
of existence and all
fields of research--
I hope it's exhaustive,
but not exhausting.
>> REGINA: I would say
that's a good description.
>> CURRIVAN: Thank you.
I appreciate that.
>> REGINA: At the beginning
you have to get through
the science.
>> CURRIVAN: You have to
get through the science.
>> REGINA: And then it starts
really mounting in the more
consciousness-driven
part of the story.
>> CURRIVAN: Very much.
And it's just the
first of a trilogy
that's going to go even
deeper into all of this.
>> REGINA: Yes, and we're
going to talk about that.
We just have a few
minutes left, so go ahead.
>> CURRIVAN: But because that
it was far more than science,
that when we understand that
and experience and embody it
on everyday levels--
this is the choices we
make in the morning,
make of love or fear
throughout the day,
this is the choices
we make of connection
or disconnection--
it affects everybody.
So launching it here with
many, many key influences
across many fields
of endeavor, to say,
guys, if you're
with this, if you'd
like to answer the
invitation of this,
can we now link up and
begin to take this forward,
so that more and more
people become aware of this
and can start to experience and
embody it in their own lives?
>> REGINA: Good for you.
And this is an encouraging note.
When I was interviewing
Rupert the other day,
he was saying that
members of parliament
have actually come together--
over a hundred of them--
for group meditation and such.
So if there was
ever a time for this
to be seated in the
consciousness of people
who are influencers--
>> CURRIVAN: This is it.
>> REGINA: This is it.
>> CURRIVAN: Well,
to add to that,
the person who
introduced mindfulness--
and it's more than 100, it's 250
staff and 150 MPs and peers--
is my dear friend
and colleague Andrew,
Lord Stone of Blackheath.
And it was Andrew that
hosted the launch of the book
last year.
And it was Andrew that got the
book into the House of Lords
Library.
And it's Andrew that I'm working
alongside, and many others,
to take this forward.
>> REGINA: Oh, this
makes my heart happy.
And the world of science, how
are they responding to it?
>> CURRIVAN: They're
coming to the party.
[LAUGHS]
>> REGINA: OK, that means little
by little you're winning one
or two over here and
there, and it'll grow.
>> CURRIVAN: Yeah, yeah.
>> REGINA: I understand
the resistance to it,
because the whole model
of reality they're working
on really comes crashing
down at certain points.
And that's a very
difficult thing
to let go of after
one has invested
their life into studying
the material world.
>> CURRIVAN: Exactly.
And this is an opportunity.
This is an opportunity
for science and scientists
to take a leap forward with
everybody else, because they
really can be part of a solution
and open the doors to so,
so much.
Or they can stay where
they've been, many of them,
and it's part of
the general problem
that we have as a
collective psyche
within that dis-ease of
extreme materialist separatism.
>> REGINA: And I think we can
probably look to the younger
scientists coming onto the scene
to pick this up, I would think,
with joy.
>> CURRIVAN: Very much, because
scientists are, by nature,
curious.
But when they're stymied,
when they're held,
that curiosity, as it is
for all of us, is limited.
And that's very sad.
And this is so
exciting, and it has
such potential for our species.
And not just our species, but
for Gaia and all her children.
Because we can step into
responsible stewardship
and service of her and all
her children and the wider
cosmos if we answer
this invitation.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
In fact, just a little bit-- we
have just a minute or so left.
On your next book coming up,
is that "Gaia, Her-Story"?
>> CURRIVAN: "Gaia,
Her-Story," yes.
>> REGINA: Tell us just a
little thumbnail sketch of what
it's going to be about.
>> CURRIVAN: I felt this
trilogy is about head, heart,
and hands.
Head is "The Cosmic Hologram",
how do we understand reality?
"Gaia, Her-Story" is our heart--
how do we remember our
relationship with Gaia
and all her children?
And Gaia is a living being
and a living universe
with its own
evolutionary impulse.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
>> CURRIVAN: The third
book is the hands--
what we do about it?
And that's "Many
Voices, One Heart."
How do we come together?
What is our opportunity?
What is our deep hidden history?
Who are we?
How do we remember?
How do we go forward together?
>> REGINA: Can't wait to do the
interviews with you on the next
two.
When will "Gaia" be out?
>> CURRIVAN: I don't know.
Everything is going so quickly
as a result of "The Cosmic
Hologram."
I've started to write
"Gaia, Her-Story."
I'm hoping to complete writing
it by the end of this year.
>> REGINA: OK, good.
Good.
We have that to look forward to.
I just thoroughly enjoyed every
moment of the conversation
with you.
I love your work
and what your dharma
is on this planet, what
you're trying to do to bridge
these great fields together.
>> CURRIVAN: Thank you, Regina.
It's been absolute joy.
Thank you for all you do,
and thanks for everybody
who's watching us.
And they can reach me,
and let's link up and just
move forward together.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
Thank you, Jude.
Dr. Jude Currivan, an incredible
amount of original thought
has gone into her work,
as you have just seen.
Again, the book is titled
"The Cosmic Hologram."
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
in London for "Open Minds."
[MUSIC PLAYING]